---
layout: post
title: Sears and Ausmus's 1881 Primitive Baptist hymnal
---

Primitive Baptist hymnals
-------------------------

Elder John R. Daily's *Primitive Baptist Hymn and Tune Book* is a
seven-shape Primitive Baptist hymnal with a strikingly distinctive
harmonic style.[^1] It turns out that many of Daily's arrangements come
from a few Primitive Baptist hymnals of the 1880s. One source is [Durant
& Lester's 1886 "Hymn and Tune
Book."](http://www.shenandoahharmony.com/2013/200-years-of-bourbon/)
Another source is Sears & Ausmus's 1881 *Primitive Baptist Hymnal,*
which I haven't seen discussed elsewhere. These sources include a number
of arrangements that were later printed in Daily. They also include some
arrangements that didn't make it into Daily, but that are written in a
similar style.

Still, Daily was not just an imitator of these earlier arrangers. The
Daily book includes some arrangements that are originals as far as I can
tell, and others that are improvements or refiniments of works from D&L
or S&A.

In other words, what I've come to think of as the "Daily book style"
wasn't just the work of one eccentric arranger. It was part of an
ongoing tendency in Primitive Baptist harmony. S&A is the earliest
source I've found for this style, but Daily and D&L were active
contributors, and it is possible that there were other authors involved
too.

Conflict
--------

The song CONFLICT, which was recently repopularized in the *Shenandoah
Harmony,* illustrates several of the Daily book's distinctive features.
Daily's harmonies lean heavily towards major keys, and he reharmonizes
many old minor-key folk hymns with borrowings from the relative major.
His arrangements often uses <span class="title-ref">IV</span> chords
where earlier books like the Sacred Harp would use <span
class="title-ref">ii</span> or <span class="title-ref">vi</span> — and
in minor-key songs, he makes heavy use of the <span
class="title-ref">IV</span> chord of the relative major[^2]. His
arrangement for CONFLICT ends its first and last phrases in minor, but
spends most of the rest of the song in the relative major, with heavy
use of the relative major <span class="title-ref">IV</span> chord.

<iframe scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/95636767&amp;color=ff5500&amp;auto*play=false&amp;hide*related=false&amp;show*comments=true&amp;show*user=true&amp;show*reposts=false"></iframe>

[![image](/assets/conflict-daily.jpg)](http://www.shenandoahharmony.com/2013/200-years-of-bourbon/)

The Better Music movement, spearheaded by Lowell Mason, also favored
major keys and traditional <span class="title-ref">I-IV-V</span>
harmonies. But Daily's harmonies are not just a copy of the ones favored
by Mason and friends. For instance, a number of songs in the Daily book
also have what Rachel Wells Hall has called [unanswered
cadences](http://www.shenandoahharmony.com/2014/questioning-the-unanswered-cadence/)
forbidden in Mason's "scientific" harmony — in which a major-key piece
ends unexpectedly on <span class="title-ref">IV</span>, <span
class="title-ref">V</span> or <span class="title-ref">vi</span>, rather
than <span class="title-ref">I</span>.

Daily's own version of CONFLICT does not have an unanswered cadence. But
as [Rachel points
out](http://www.shenandoahharmony.com/2013/200-years-of-bourbon/) an
earlier version in D&L did have one. In that book it was completely
recast in major, with no trace of its minor-key origins, and in order to
accommodate the last note of the tune it ended on <span
class="title-ref">IV</span> rather than <span
class="title-ref">I</span>.

[![image](/assets/conflict-DL.jpg)](http://www.shenandoahharmony.com/2013/200-years-of-bourbon)

As it turns out, this earlier version of CONFLICT did not originate with
D&L. It appeared several years earlier in S&A:

[![image](/assets/conflict-SA.jpg)](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/322))

Other songs
-----------

In fact, many of the harmonically adventurous arrangements from the
Daily book and D&L appeared in S&A first.

Conquering soldier [S&A 93](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/280),
Daily 211) is a lovely example. This arrangement, which first appeared
in S&A, takes the minor-key tune which appears in the Sacred Harp as 201
PILGRIM and reharmonizes it entirely in major, resorting to an
unanswered cadence on <span class="title-ref">IV</span> to accommodate
the last note. For this song, Daily does not make any significant
changes to S&A's arrangement. In particular, unlike in CONFLICT, he
keeps the unanswered cadence, which in my opinion is one of the song's
finest features. Here's the Sacred Harp version of the tune, harmonized
in minor:

<iframe scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/75262983&amp;color=ff5500&amp;auto*play=false&amp;hide*related=false&amp;show*comments=true&amp;show*user=true&amp;show*reposts=false"></iframe>

And here's the arrangement found in S&A and Daily, reharmonized in
major:

<iframe scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/209363941&amp;color=ff5500&amp;auto*play=false&amp;hide*related=false&amp;show*comments=true&amp;show*user=true&amp;show*reposts=false"></iframe>

[![image](/assets/conquering-soldier.jpg)](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/280)

Another example of these books' style is SALVATION ([S&A
62](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/190), D&L 189, Daily 158). It is
another minor key tune, and begins and ends on the tonic in minor, but
the second half of the tune strays into the relative major. (The high
point for me is at the end of the third line, where the 1-La is
harmonized not with a <span class="title-ref">i</span> or <span
class="title-ref">iv</span> as it usually would be in the Sacred Harp,
but with <span class="title-ref">IV/III</span>, the <span
class="title-ref">IV</span> chord of the relative major key.) S&A and
D&L have nearly identical versions; Daily has the same chord changes,
but many of the details of the parts are different.

[![image](/assets/salvation.jpg)](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/190)

Some other highlights from D&L and Daily that seem to have originated in
S&A include:

-   An arrangement of SOCIAL BAND that leans heavily on the relative
    major ([S&A 10](www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/29), D&L 85, also in
    the Daily book as 262 AMBOY).
-   A reharmonization of the E Dorian tune LAND OF REST in which it is
    treated as if it were in D Major — requiring it to end in an
    unanswered cadence on the V chord to accomodate the final E ([S&A
    150](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/410), D&L 135).
-   A startling Lydian-mode version of BRAY ([S&A
    39](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/120), D&L 45), a tune which
    appeared in a plainer major arrangement in the Hesperian Harp (64).
-   An oddly Classical-sounding major-key version of STAR IN THE EAST
    ([S&A 185](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/478), D&L 24).[^3]
-   KENTUCKY ([S&A 18](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/52), D&L
    202), a pleasant but fairly tame reharmonization of Lucius Chapin's
    PRIMROSE or NINETY-THIRD PSALM (SH 31).

And there are some gems in S&A that weren't repeated in those later
books, including reharmonized versions of MINISTER'S FAREWELL ([S&A
86](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/258)) and RESTORATION (retitled
I WILL ARISE, [S&A 12](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/32)).

A regional trend?
-----------------

Many, though not all, of these highlights in S&A are marked "Arranged by
T. B. A." — almost certainly the initials of Thomas Box Ausmus, the
book's second author. It is tempting to wonder if Ausmus might in fact
have been the source of all of these distinctive arrangements.

But that can't be the whole story — for Daily and D&L also have
reharmonizations in the same style that did not originate in S&A. This
suggests that the authors of the other books were not just copying from
Ausmus, but were participating in a larger stylistic trend along with
him.

One especially dramatic example of the three books' independence from
each other is the tune IDUMEA. Each of the three books has its own
version. Sears & Ausmus ([31](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/90))
leave the melody unaltered, but reharmonize it entirely in the relative
major up until the final two bars.

[![image](/assets/ausmus31idumea.jpg)](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/PBH1881/90)

Daily (125) leaves the tune in minor, though with more borrowings from
the relative major than were in the original, but he adds several
chromatic alterations to the melody. Durand & Lester (177) take a
similar approach to Daily, but make different choices in reharmonizing
the piece.

[![image](/assets/lester177idumea.png)](http://www.hymnary.org/hymn/HTBU1886/439))

All three arrangements seem to me like "modernizations" of the tune in
more or less the same spirit.

So these arrangements weren't just the work of a single eccentric
arranger: the authors of each book created some new arrangements of
their own,[^4] followings similar stylistic trends. In fact, I'm tempted
to wonder whether it may have been a regional or denominational trend.
The three book's authors were members of the same faith, all worked
within several decades of each other, and all were connected in one way
or another to a fairly small area surrounding Saint Louis and
Indianapolis.[^5] This could be a coincidence. (I have not looked at
Primitive Baptist hymnals of that era from other regions, or hymnals
from other churches from that region.) But it could also suggest that
these authors were participating in a local tradition. Perhaps Primitive
Baptist congregations in that place and time were beginning to sing in
distinctive ways — preferring major chords, using <span
class="title-ref">IV</span> in major and <span
class="title-ref">IV/III</span> in minor, becoming fond of unanswered
cadences — and these books' authors were echoing the new style in their
arrangements.

**Footnotes**

[^1]: The Daily book was first published in 1902, and is still in print.
    It is available from the Primitive Baptist Library,
    <http://www.pblib.org>. It is the source of several popular songs
    reprinted in the *Shenandoah Harmony* (CONFLICT is one of them) and
    is starting to be used in social singings by some Sacred Harp
    singers in the mid-Atlantic and New England.

[^2]: This is especially dramatic in contrast to the harmonic tradition
    found in the Sacred Harp, where "minor"-key folk hymns are almost
    all in the dorian mode. The <span class="title-ref">IV</span> chord
    of the relative major (notated as <span
    class="title-ref">IV/III</span>) is based on the sixth scale degree;
    and so the dorian mode, which raises the sixth scale degree, makes
    that chord unavailable. One of the few exceptions is 271 ARKANSAS, a
    minor-key tune in the folk-hymn style which briefly features an open
    fifth "power chord" on <span class="title-ref">IV/III</span> (and is
    always sung in true minor rather than dorian), but it uses this
    chord very differently than Daily and company would have — it is
    part of a passage in which the bass follows the melody in parallel
    fifths. In the Daily book style, <span
    class="title-ref">IV/III</span> usually appears as part of
    traditional tonic-dominant-subdominant chord changes in the relative
    major, and parallel fifths of any sort are comparatively rare. The
    Makers of the Sacred Harp tells us the author of ARKANSAS was
    Shadrack Barnett of Carroll County, Georgia, who had no apparent
    connection to the arrangers discussed here.

[^3]: Unlike most reharmonizations in these books, where the tune is
    left mostly unaltered but the chords underneath it are changed, this
    version of STAR IN THE EAST converts the tune from minor to major by
    chromatic alteration, simply stripping out all of its flats.

[^4]: It is possible that there is a common source that we still have
    not located for most of these arrangements — some fourth book that
    these three were drawing from. But it is unlikely that that fourth
    book would have included three different reharmonizations of IDUMEA,
    and that each of the three books we do have would have taken a
    different one. It is much more likely that each of the books we have
    was the original source for one reharmonization.

[^5]: Thomas Box Ausmus probably lived in Brown County, IL, due north of
    Saint Louis, up until 1899. We know this from church records:
    apparently Ausmus was ejected from his Brown County congregation in
    1899 for taking up residence with a woman not his wife and
    fraudulently practicing medicine under an assumed name! [An
    announcement of this was printed in the "Primitive Monitor" in March
    1899](https://books.google.com/books?id=R-QRAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA190&lpg=PA190&dq=%22thomas+box+ausmus%22&source=bl&ots=A14dWRCuZJ&sig=xZ0v23GTpzPO3emuvmvJIJWTlBw&hl=en&sa=X&ei=j8lxVeSKJcqWygSMzYLQBA&ved=0CCEQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=%22thomas%20box%20ausmus%22&f=false)).
    Daily's book is now published in Carthage, IL, which is
    tantalizingly close to Brown County — only 50 or so miles — but
    Daily himself was apparently more closely connected to Indianapolis.
    He is mentioned in connection with a debate in Ewing, Illinois,
    which is southeast of Saint Louis and 200 miles from Brown County.
    but [according to an obituary in the October 1920 "Primitive
    Monitor", he was baptized in Clinton County, IN, and died in
    Indianapolis in
    1920.](https://books.google.com/books?id=x3czAQAAMAAJ&amp;pg=PA433&amp;lpg=PA433&amp;dq=%22elder+john+r+daily%22&amp;source=bl&amp;ots=sjdeHsDV3I&amp;sig=AxEZxefamQ7upDP6fkog6OB77vk&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;ei=f35wVauLEZWiyAS704GQDw&amp;ved=0CEwQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&amp;q=%22elder%20john%20r%20daily%22&amp;f=false)
    The original 1902 edition of his book was published in Indianapolis
    as well. Durand & Lester's hymnal was also published in
    Indianapolis, though the authors were from farther east: Durand from
    Bucks County, PA, and Lester from Floyd County, VA.
